# Tools of Titans The Tactics Routines and Habits of Billionaires Icons and WorldClass Performers
- chrysalis to emerge with new capabilities. The “normal” systems
- Jason brought this delicious tea for us to drink during recording. It’s sometimes called “duck shit fragrance tea.” Supposedly, long ago in a region in China, the local populace wanted to keep this amazing tea for themselves, so they nicknamed it “duck shit” tea. Smart move. It was played down for centuries, until being rediscovered as very much non–duck shit flavored. Jason gets his from Quantitea (quantitea.com). Jason has traveled the
- Jason brought this delicious tea for us to drink during recording. It’s sometimes called “duck shit fragrance tea.” Supposedly, long ago in a region in China, the local populace wanted to keep this amazing tea for themselves, so they nicknamed it “duck shit” tea. Smart move. It was played down for centuries, until being rediscovered as very much non–duck
- Jason brought this delicious tea for us to drink during recording. It’s sometimes called “duck shit fragrance tea.” Supposedly, long ago in a region in China, the local populace wanted to keep this amazing tea for themselves, so they nicknamed it “duck shit” tea. Smart move. It was played down for centuries, until being rediscovered as very much non–duck shit flavored.
- dilute. I’d just consumed about five cups of coffee. Kelly calls it his “cup of fear.” We hit record and I immediately started to sweat like I was being chased by hyenas. ►
- chasing the cutting edge of blood testing, genomics, etc. For men, the “boner or no boner” test is a simple but excellent indicator of sleep quality, hormonal health (GH, FSH, testosterone), circadian rhythm timing, and more. THE CAMPFIRE SQUAT TEST “If you can’t squat all the way down to the ground with your feet and knees together, then you are missing full hip and ankle range of motion.
- For men, the “boner or no boner” test is a simple but excellent indicator of sleep quality, hormonal health (GH, FSH, testosterone), circadian rhythm timing, and more. THE CAMPFIRE SQUAT TEST “If you can’t squat all the way down to the ground with your feet and knees together, then you are missing full hip and ankle range of motion. This is the mechanism causing your hip impingement, plantar fasciitis, torn Achilles, pulled calf, etc. That is the fucking problem, and you should be obsessing about [fixing] this.” “The most dangerous sport to middle-aged men is a track workout [because the body is working with high force
